---
title: 'Nuclear Armed Canada'
date: 2020-01-08
permalink: /posts/2020/2020-01-08-canada_nuclear.md/
tags:
  - Nuclear Canada
  - Manhattan project
  - Nuclear Race
---

Amidst the manhattan project and nuclear race in the '40s,  Canada was the key element to the of the American and British nuclear programs. The Canadian province of Manitoba was birthplace to uranium for the Americans. Plants were built in it to produce the heavy water needed to produce plutonium. In 1942, British evacuated their nuclear scientist and engineers to Canada to work on joint nuclear projects with Americans. British and Canadian scientists developed and assembled the very first heavy water reactor ZEEP (Zero Energy Experimental Pile) to produce plutonium outside of the USA. In 1945, they added an installation that separates to separate plutonium from irradiated fuel. In 1947, they developed and launched an improved NRX (National Research Experimental) heavy water reactor. In other words, by 1947, Canada had a complete technological chain for creating an atomic bomb. Methods of delivery are completely other subject matter. Bear in mind that Canada was and is a country that officially renounces possession of a nuclear weapon. In 1946, the British packed up their belongings and left Canada to develop own national nuclear program. While the Canadian government became the sole and happy owner of a fully developed modern nuclear weapon supply chain.

Anyone would have been thrilled to have it. It took over 30 years for North Koreans to develop a remotely similar, yet highly questionable program. But No. While the British were assembling own facilities and accumulating plutonium on their islands. Canadians were still needed, but what to do next? The industry consumed a lot of money and resources. The industry consumed a lot of money and resources. Financing the project without an apparent profit and no benefits to society was a heavy burden for a relatively small economy. That is why, in 1952, the government dropped the burden by releasing nuclear complex into the private company AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Limited). However, the newly established AECL still saw a fat red bottom line. Of course, research is good, but it does not generate much money. All Canadian allies and rich enough countries themselves already produced heavy water and plutonium. Most of the world was struggling to rebuild after the war. Some bright head the leadership of AECL thought: “So, we have a technology to build a reactor. So what if it can be used to produce weapons-grade plutonium. We can just add to the contract that it is forbidden and everything will be in alright.” The advantage of the reactor was its relative simplicity and low fuel requirements - it could operate on natural uranium without enrichment. They quietly probed the market and quickly found a client with a bunch of extra money and insane ambitions - India.

In 1955, AECL and Indians signed a deal. In 1956, The United States, which had a desire to lure the Indians to their side, agreed to supply heavy water for the reactor, but on a condition that it be used only for peaceful purposes. The new reactor was named in the honour of all participants "Cirus" - Canada-India Reactor, U.S. and, in 1960, it achieved its first critical mass. Having gained access to nuclear technology and a working reactor, the Indians, obviously, unilaterally broke all agreements on its peaceful use. But they did not tell anyone about it. And on the of 18th of May in 1974, the world felt the awakening of the “Smiling Buddha” with a capacity of 8 kilotons in TNT equivalent. The emergence of a new nuclear power that refused to join any military-political bloc, and even refused to join the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, significantly backfired at the United States' fourth point of contact. They realized that now actually anyone can acquire nuclear weapons, without the help or supervision of USSR or USA in the matter. That day the World become a much more dangerous place. Back to the Canadians. Cunning nuclear experts from AECL were counting profits and poked their fingers on the terms of the contract - we are the honest dealers, we complied with all the terms of the transaction, it is just the client happened to be uncooperative.

Therefore, when a year later, the cunning Canadian nuclear scientists launched into an operation a PUREX reprocessing plant in Taiwan, which was coupled with the heavy water tanker built 5 years earlier, the Americans got so pissed that they forced the Canadians to disassemble the plant under the threat of heavy sanctions. While a little barking Taiwanese government got a small compensation in terms of General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon.

The moral of the story is that Americans can and will sanction event its closest allies and own companies. Today, nuclear warhead core production is a very easy process. With the abundance of the uranium and simple process of development, the question of nuclear proliferation is not if, when and how strong, but in mere motivation and desire to build that weapon. On the 3rd of January 2020, Iran finally got it. On that day the World become a very dangerous place.



